Family peace is precious.
It’s even as the Bible proverb says:
“Better is a piece of dry bread
where there is peace
than a house full of feasting
along with quarreling.”
But what exactly is family peace?
Someone might say, “As long as we’re not
arguing, our family is at peace.”
But is that real peace?
We might think of two countries
that were fighting
but have now agreed to a cease-fire.
Does the cease-fire mean that they’ve become
real friends who love one another?
No.
We know that genuine peace takes more work.
That’s true in the family as well.
Our heavenly Father knows
that the most satisfying family peace
involves more than an absence of arguing.
It involves a family’s well-being and unity.
Is such peace in a family today
really possible?
Although none of us have a perfect family,
the answer is yes.
While it requires work
—perhaps breaking bad habits
that disrupt peace and adopting
new ones that promote it—
those efforts are worth it.
In this symposium,
we’ll see how Bible principles
can guide families to peace,
just as a road map
guides travelers to a beautiful destination.
In each of the talks,
we invite you husbands, fathers,
wives, mothers, children, teenagers
to be the traveler who studies the map
and then goes in the right direction.
The focus of our first talk
is showing love and respect.
Why would you say these two qualities
are so important to family peace?
Well, it’s simple:
because family members
who love and respect one another
feel secure and appreciated.
As a result, our relationships
are warm, close, and peaceful.
Of course, showing love and respect
can be a challenge these days.
In the following dramatization notice why.
Irene.
Aww,
you look so handsome there.
Oh, you look beautiful.
Those came out so nice.
Look at you.
Crazy, right?
That’s the day!
Look at us.
You’re so surprised.
I just knew you were going to do it.
Sorry, Olivia.
Are you OK?
Yeah, it’s OK, Sue.
I’m so sorry.
No worries.
Um, I’m all moved in.
That was the last box.
Dad, are those the wedding photos?
Yeah.
Let me see.
Look it. Here’s . . .
Oh, you all look beautiful.
That dress looks so nice.
You look so good.
Aww, look at you.
Aww, that suits you.
Very nice, you guys.
Yeah, it all came together.
It really did.
Yeah.
Olivia?
I know this is all new, baby.
Be patient.
Can I cut in?
Yeah, sure.
Thanks.
What’s wrong?
Where’s the desk?
We had to get rid of it.
This one is better for everyone.
You mean it’s better for him!
For Max?
What are you saying?
What do you care?
Don’t talk to me like that. Get back here!
Hey, Olivia, what do you think
about the desk?
Come here, sweetie. Come here.
So you never forget that I love you.
I hope you like it.
Today, every family
faces challenges of some sort.
So let’s consult our road map together
in the Bible at Romans 12:10.
Would you read it with me, please?
That’s Romans 12:10:
“In brotherly love
“have tender affection for one another.
In showing honor to one another,
take the lead.”
Now, what’s the point?
Regardless of the role we play in the family,
each of us needs to treat our family members
with love and respect.
We need to “take the lead,”
or initiative, to do so.
To help us, let’s consider four good habits
that all of us should work
to develop more fully.
Habit number one:
Regularly express tender affection.
When conveyed with sincerity,
expressions of affection
are like sunshine and water to plants.
They help everyone
in the family grow and thrive.
In the video we just watched,
did you note how Olivia
cherished her father’s gift (that green desk)
and his tender words?
He told her,
“So you never forget that I love you.”
We also saw warm affection
as the newly blended family
of Max and Irene looked at wedding photos.
That was encouraging.
Well, here’s a question: How are we doing
in expressing tender affection in our family?
If that’s not one of our strengths,
we might relate to a husband
who mustered up the courage
to say “I love you” to his wife.
It brought her to tears—tears of joy.
And she said this, “I love you too,
but this is the first time in 25 years
you’ve said it like that.”
Well, what’s the point?
We don’t want to wait that long, of course,
but even an awkward attempt
at expressing affection in our family
is an act of love,
and it can do so much good.
That’s a habit we all want to cultivate.
Let’s consider a second habit:
Be kind in your actions,
tone of voice, and choice of words.
In the video, we recall Irene’s reassurance
to her daughter, Olivia.
She said: “I know this is all new, baby.
Be patient.”
Mom was kind
in what she said and how she said it.
A little later, though, Olivia was upset.
While we know she was hurt,
her speech and actions were not so kind,
were they?
During the pandemic,
all of us have been under tremendous stress,
and likely we didn’t always treat others
in our family as kindly
as we would have liked.
Well, that’s in the past.
But what can we all do now?
We can pray to Jehovah
to help us “take the lead”
in showing kindness.
For example,
every day greeting one another kindly,
every day saying “please” and “thank you,”
sharing little gifts,
making time to talk, really listening
—all of these are acts of kindness.
That’s a good habit we all want to cultivate.
What’s habit number three?
Be quick to apologize and forgive freely.
In the video, Olivia’s new stepsister, Sue,
apologized after she bumped into Olivia
with a box by mistake.
That apology promoted peace.
When you and I realize we’ve hurt someone
even unintentionally, what should we do?
We should make amends quickly.
A mother named Marina said this:
“We try to set a good example
for our children
“in forgiving others
. . . and not getting offended.
“When I am wrong, I apologize to my children.
I want them to learn to do the same
in their dealings with others.”
That’s a good habit, wouldn’t you agree?
Well, let’s consider one more,
a fourth habit:
Help your family members feel respected.
An article in the Awake!  magazine
once made this insightful comment:
“Respect is in the eye of the beholder.”
What does that mean?
Even if we think
we’re showing respect in the family,
good questions to ask ourselves are:
‘Do my family members
feel that I respect them?
‘Is there more I can do to help my mate,
my children, or my parents
feel loved and respected?’
Brothers and sisters, when we fulfill
our God-given role in the family
by developing good habits such as these,
we show respect both for Jehovah
and for all of our family members.
Now, let’s think about Olivia and her mom.
In the next video,
note how peace can be restored
by showing love and respect.
It’s OK, Mom.
You didn’t know.
Dad did that for her just before he died.
Anything I can do to help?
Romans 12:10:
“In showing honor to one another,
take the lead.”
Olivia?
I made your favorite tonight.
Thank you.
I wanted to tell you
that I didn’t handle that so well today.
You had good reason
to be upset about the desk.
Mom, you didn’t know.
It’s just one of those things
that Dad did just for me.
I know he’s my stepdad now, but
I just wish he would have checked first.
It wasn’t Max.
It was me.
I wanted to surprise Max
with a place for him to do his work.
So he didn’t make you get rid of the desk?
No.
I just thought you both didn’t care.
I will never ever stop caring about you.
What a beautiful outcome!
The well-being and unity
of the family were restored.
The mom, Irene,
applied the principle at Romans 12:10.
She ‘took the lead,’ or the initiative,
to talk kindly with her daughter.
Though Olivia was upset,
she too showed love and respect
by being willing to listen to her mom.
As a result,
the misunderstanding was cleared up,
and Irene used the opportunity to reassure
her precious daughter of her love,
saying, “I will never ever
stop caring about you.”
And how our hearts were touched
to see their warm embrace!
When we “take the lead”
in applying Bible principles,
we promote genuine family peace.
So may all of us be determined
to keep showing our family
that we truly love and respect them
in word and action.
Now please listen as Brother Robert Luccioni,
a helper to the Publishing Committee,
considers the next talk
of this symposium, with the theme
“Follow the Road Map to Family Peace
—Improve Communication.”